On the 4th of May, the CESTA fellows were pleased to welcome Ruth and Sebastian Ahnert to our weekly meeting. Ruth lectures and researches Renaissance culture at Queen Mary (London) while Sebastian is a Physicist at Cambridge (UK). As usual, conversation joined conviviality, and we discussed several topics pertinent to the digital humanities, focusing on networks, archives, and publishing.

While at Stanford, Ruth and Sebastian work jointly on a project that traces the network of power relationships among Protestants in Tudor England (see also an interview with Ruth via Stanford Humanities Center). Using metadata from epistolary evidence, such as the names, places and occupations of authors and recipients of letters, they have identified nodes of influence previously undetected by traditional research. Most of the time, Sebastian engineers the digital tools which Ruth co-designs and then applies to interpreting a corpus of data collected from various archives.

Digital archives, more and more prevalent in institutions worldwide, are often a welcome sight to the interested researcher. Yet it is not uncommon for these archives to be couched in a convoluted and user-unfriendly interface, a gatekeeper that hinders or obscures access to data. Even with information freely available online, it can be difficult for a interested researcher to navigate the plurality of search boxes, insufficiently tagged data-points, or unhelpful hierarchies. Often times the digital interface is modeled on the experience of a researcher in a physical archive, where idiosyncratic organizing principles (e.g. stacks of boxes) correlate to the presentation of data on the website and requires a higher learning curve for potential users. When possible, the better scenario also avails researchers of the data itself in a downloadable, usable format.

Once the information has been gathered and the metadata aggregated, what do we do with all the information? R+S provided us with helpful suggestions. Look for frequencies, peeks; try clustering in different ways; find a story, ignoring 'noise;' seek scalability from numbers; clearly link the algorithm to the text and the source, providing the researcher with context to interpret.

Following a theme of the year, we also discussed digital methods of publishing completed research. Beyond traditional journals, we discussed how digital humanities journals are a likely receptive venue for articles on methodology. Moreover, we are fortunate here at Stanford to have the support of our library who can archive and make public digital artifacts, such as code and databases.

It was great having Ruth and Sebastian with us, and we look forward to keeping up with their project!
